---
date: 2019-02-20
subject: "technical excellence: faster large c++ incremental build tools"
to: candidate-less-trainers@googlegroups.com
url: https://groups.google.com/d/msgid/candidate-less-trainers/0d219cc6-f2bc-4556-ac1e-603e6a6e9df0%40googlegroups.com
---

many large-scale product devs are in c++. am currently at tomtom coaching
legacy tdd in c++, and from that, some useful tips for faster incremental
builds in giant code bases:

first, for background context: these days many (most?) large c++ builds --
and the only c++ ide with serious refactoring support, clion from jetbrains
-- are based on cmake. cmake is at a higher level than low-level tools such
as make, and it typically generates make files. one of the problems from
that is the time impact for incremental builds, because of how it typically
leads to a recursive make structure and less-than-genius dependency
structuring. a typical symptom of this during development is that when one
does a build, that more is built than one would like, and it takes longer


tomtom, by using together the tools below, has driven down their c++
incremental build time by a half or even a tenth in various cases


-c


*== ninja*
to quote, "Ninja is a small build system with a focus on speed. It differs
from other build systems in two major respects: it is designed to have its
input files generated by a higher-level build system, and it is designed to
run builds as fast as possible."

it is a low-level build tool that replaces make. it was created at google,
and is used for google chrome, LLVM, and android builds.

it also sets up dependencies better than make when driven from cmake at the
higher level, so that it's more likely that an incremental build will be
smaller/faster

https://ninja-build.org/


*== c++ dependency checker with cmake file generation*
cmake has 2 ways to indicate the files to build: (1) to manually maintain
the lists of files within cmakelists.txt files, or (2) to use a wild card
"glob" approach. (1) is a huge pain in large scale, and (2) is slow in
large scale.

this tool does a smart analysis and auto generates the cmakelists.txt files
with optimal organization for dependencies, so that (1) people don't have
to manually maintain the lists of files, (2) people don't have to use the
inefficient "glob" method, and (3) incremental builds are as smart and
micro-incremental as possible (i.e. fast)

https://github.com/tomtom-international/cpp-dependencies


*== gold linker*
this linker was also created at google to be as fast a possible, and is now
a gnu tools linker alternative to the standard gnu linker

https://www.gnu.org/software/binutils/


*== clion ninja*
as mentioned, clion is the only c++ ide with serious refactoring support,
so useful for tdd (a key element of tech excellence in LeSS). by default,
clion uses cmake with standard make. this improves it to use ninja at the
lower level, with the resulting smarter/faster dependency structuring, etc

https://gist.github.com/pthom/bf66cc429ee0c7641674
